University of Massachusetts Boston
ScholarWorks at UMass Boston

Africana Studies Faculty Publication Series                                                      Africana Studies


1-1992


The Nwagu Aneke Igbo Script: Its Origins, Features and Potentials
as a Medium of Alternative Literacy in African Languages
Chukwuma Azuonye
University of Massachusetts Boston, chukwuma.azuonye@umb.edu




If you have a disability and have trouble accessing this content, please report the issue!


Recommended Citation
Azuonye, Chukwuma, "The Nwagu Aneke Igbo Script: Its Origins, Features and Potentials as a Medium of
Alternative Literacy in African Languages" (1992). Africana Studies Faculty Publication Series. 13.
https://scholarworks.umb.edu/africana_faculty_pubs/13


This Article is brought to you for free and open access by the Africana Studies at ScholarWorks at UMass Boston. It
has been accepted for inclusion in Africana Studies Faculty Publication Series by an authorized administrator of
ScholarWorks at UMass Boston. For more information, please contact scholarworks@umb.edu,
Lydia.BurrageGoodwin@umb.edu.
 The Nwagu Aneke Igbo Script: Its Origins, Features and Potentials
    as a Medium of Alternative Literacy in African Languages1
                                                       By

                                         Chukwuma Azuonye
                                     Professor of African Literature
                                  University of Massachusetts at Boston
                                         Boston, Massachusetts

Introduction
   Since the middle of the 19th century, there have been numerous reports of the creation or,
more probably, the (re)-discovery of various types of indigenous writing in some parts of West
Africa by men commonly regarded as illiterate in the post-colonial situation in which literacy is
measured exclusively in terms of proficiency in either the Arabic or the Roman script—the two
systems of writing imposed on Africa through colonialism.2 This extremely narrow colonialist
yardstick further limits the conditions of literacy by insisting on defining it in terms of ability to
read and write the colonial languages. Thus, even today, in many African countries, millions of
ordinary rural and urban folk who can read and write their own indigenous languages, in the
Roman and Arabic scripts, are not officially reckoned as literate in statistics published by various
national governments and international organizations such as the UNESCO. In general, the
various forms of indigenous writing noticed so far in West Africa, seem to have (re-)emerged as
modes of ultra-nationalist reaction against the dominance of the colonial scripts and languages
and what their purveyors see as the alien and alienating systems of knowledge transmitted
through them into the African mind. Invariably claiming supernatural inspiration, the chief
exponents of each script is reported as setting out, not to complete the tripod of what Ali Mazrui
(1986) calls the "triple heritage" of indigenous, Arabic and Western cultural values in Africa, but
to assert the autonomy, purity, strength and superiority of traditional African values against the
claims of the values arising from the colonial experience.
   The present paper is a study of the origins, features and significance of one of the thirty or so
indigenous systems of writing which (re-)emerged during the colonial period as a medium for
challenging alien cultural values and for the re-assertion of the superiority of African spiritual
and moral traditions and of the thought-patterns which lie behind them. I have in earlier papers
focused attention almost exclusively on these radically revisionist views of the allegedly
damaging legacy of colonialism purveyed though this remarkable script and its literature by the

1. This paper was originally delivered as a lecture at the Literacy Speaker Series of the National Center for Adult
Literacy/The Literacy Research Center, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, May 13, 1992, and
at the Adult Literacy Training Workshop, also organized by the National Center for Adult Literacy Center,
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, June 15-26, 1992. It was subsequently presented at the Healey Library,
University of Massachusetts at Boston, under the auspices of the William Monroe Trotter Institute Forum Series
1992/1993, on Wednesday, December 9, 1992. A revised version was also presented and enthusiastically discussed
at the Xth Annual Conference on African Linguistics at the Ohio State University, Columbus, OH. The present
version benefits from the critical comments and suggestions received from professional colleagues at the above
presentations.
2. See: Wilson and Wynkoop, 1834; Koelle, 1849
      Chukwuma Azuonye / The Nwagu Aneke Igbo Script: Its Origins, Features and Potentials                   2


man who claimed to have invented it—a one-time prosperous land-owner and diviner, the late
Ogbuevi Nwagu Aneke of the village of Umuleri in the Anambra Local Government Area of
Anambra State of South-Eastern Nigeria. The present paper will focus on the mechanics of the
script itself, and I shall be reflecting at large on one of the numerous potential values of studying
it, namely the possibilities and problems of developing it as a medium for alternative literacy in
African languages. I shall be reflecting on these matters as the Director of a project—the Nwagu
Aneke Research Project3—which is committed to documenting and studying the Nwagu Aneke
script from a wide range of disciplinary perspectives—linguistic, literary, historiographic,
philosophical, educational, and so forth. I speak both for myself and for other members of the
Nwagu Aneke Research team on the main directions of our research and my purpose is to try as
best as I can to elicit wider scholarly discourse on the script.
    The challenge of developing the script as a medium of "alternative literacy" figures
prominently in the statement of the objectives of our research team. But what do we mean by
"alternative literacy"? For us, "alternative literacy", by analogy to "alternative medicine", refers
to all activities and processes of reading and writing which can profitably exist in complementary
relationship with the official literacy media in a given social environment. Also, by analogy to
alternative medicine, such activities and processes of reading and writing deserve official
recognition and promotion if and where it is clearly demonstrable that they can reach the masses,
especially at the rural grassroots, with relatively greater ease than the mainline systems. The
question before us in this presentation is: Can the Nwagu Aneke script function effectively as
such an alternative medium of literacy not only in Igbo, its base language, but in a wider range of
indigenous African languages, especially those in the Niger-Congo family?

The Origins of the Nwagu Aneke Script
    On the eve of Nigeria's independence in 1960, Ogbuevi Nwagu Aneke, who was well-known
in his village as an unlettered but highly successful land owner and diviner (dibịa afa) suddenly
announced to his bewildered and amused townsmen that he had been taught how to read and
write by spirits (ndị mmụọ). Like Coleridge's ancient mariner, he carried the story of his
transformation from stark illiteracy to literacy to anyone who cared to listen. A few were
impressed by the quaint characters which he poured out daily on cheap exercise books and called
it an "Igbo shorthand"; but, as the great majority of his kinsmen watched him neglect his rights,
privileges and responsibilities as a titled medicine man and head of his extended family,
succumbing to poverty as he ignored the seizure of his property by land-grabbing neighbors
while he devoted hours on end everyday writing, they concluded that he had either run stark mad
or turned into a capricious fool. But Nwagu Aneke persisted in his story of spiritual revelation
and the burden of a message for the salvation of the black man which the spirits had placed upon
his head.



3. The project, which was initiated by the late Professor Donatus Nwoga at the Institute of African Studies,
University of Nigeria, Nsukka (Nwagu Aneke Research Project, 1990), is currently relocated in the Department of
Africana Studies at the University of Massachusetts, Boston, USA
     Chukwuma Azuonye / The Nwagu Aneke Igbo Script: Its Origins, Features and Potentials                3


   Now, this is his story. One night, when he went to bed, he was visited by strange beings who
he later identified, as they persisted in visiting him night after night, as the spirits of his
ancestors. According to Nwagu Aneke, these spirits asked him to go to the shrine of the earth
goddess, Ajaana, at the holy village of Nneyi to perform certain rites of purification in view of
the filthy life he had lead in the past, for he had been selected for a great mission on earth. One
market week (izu) after this purification, the spirits returned. According to Nwagu Aneke, in one
of his early books, dating back to the early nineteen-sixties:

   [The spirits] told me that I would acquire the knowledge of reading and writing. They said that the
   work I had to do in the world were enormous, that the actions I would have to perform in the
   world were extensive. They said that it was not work that could be done from the memory that I
   had come to do, that the messages I had to deliver were not messages that could be carried fully in
   the memory, that the actions I had to take were not actions that could be borne in memory,
   otherwise, the people who now live on earth would say that I had run mad. So, it was necessary
   that I should obtain the knowledge of reading and writing.

   Ironically, the eventual sudden acquisition of the knowledge of reading and writing, which
purportedly followed this spiritual revelation, turned Nwagu Aneke into a lunatic in the eyes of
his people. Struck down, as he says, by Agwụ, the Igbo god of madness and creativity, he roamed
the forests like a wild animal, for weeks on end, gathering the leaves of trees. According to him,
the leaves even spoke to him as he approached them, like objects in Alice in Wonderland, urging
him to pluck them, and as he despaired, a certain bird was quick at hand to spur him on, crowing
like a cock:

   Gbadokwa ume ooooo!
   Gbadokwa ume ooooo!
   [Hold up your breath ooooo!
   Hold up your breath ooooo!]

   On returning home with sacks of the leaves of the trees, he claims that, as he copied the marks
on leaf after leaf, spurred on by the spirits, each mark became associated with a distinctive
sound, each of which, within the analytical framework of modern linguistics, can be said to
represent a syllable. In this way, claims Nwagu Aneke, he succeeded, after some years of
continuous and excruciating labor, in developing a complete syllabary for the writing of his
native Umuleri dialect of Igbo, without ever stepping into a classroom. This syllabary is
contained in the chart and the alphabetical list of characters presented in Appendix I and II
respectively.
   Needless to say, Nwagu Aneke's story has a familiar ring with echoes in many situations
associated especially with the birth of religion across the world and across the centuries. We are
reminded in particular of Prophet Mohammed and his message of Islam. Like the message of
Islam, the message of Nwagu Aneke is a radical restatement of traditional values against what
the inspired receptor of supernatural revelation regards as alien and alienating orthodoxy. In the
100 or so extant exercise books filled with his messages, Nwagu Aneke restates the vitality of a
     Chukwuma Azuonye / The Nwagu Aneke Igbo Script: Its Origins, Features and Potentials            4


triad of God, elemental deities and spirits who govern the world and control the interaction that
should exist between human beings and these forces as well as other human beings and other
creations against what he sees as the antithetical religion of Christianity and the spiritual nullity
of Western civilization. These forcefully rendered arguments for a radical return to the roots of a
truly indigenous African system of values and thought-patterns run through Nwagu Aneke's
daily diaries, his comments on the events of the day and his other writings. These are currently
being transcribed into the Roman alphabet, translated and edited by members of the Nwagu
Aneke Research Team for critical study as literature, philosophy and social commentary.
    Let us now proceed to the issue at hand - the features of the script itself and its potentials as a
medium of alternative literacy in indigenous African languages. We need no apologia for this
exercise. The script exists, and unlike the systems which have established themselves in Africa
as legacies of Arab and European colonialism, it is a local manifestation of a wider West Africa
phenomenon which has grown out of purely indigenous resources. If we must be as circumspect
as we should be in planning mass literacy programs for Africa, indigenous resources of this kind
need to be thoroughly examined for any alternative insights which they may provide, for what
Nwagu Aneke describes as visitation by spirit beings may be nothing other than an expression, in
terms of the traditional Igbo world view, of what in the rational philosophy of the West would
simply be described as either pure inspiration or the fetishization of the power of reading and
writing.

The Features of the Nwagu Aneke Script
   As should be clear by now, the Nwagu Aneke script is essentially a syllabic form of writing. It
belongs to the phase in the evolution of writing systems at which various conventional characters
are used to represent the syllables of a language (see Appendix 1 for the syllabary of the Nwagu
Aneke script). However, as in all writing systems, including the Roman and Arabic scripts, a few
logographs (characters representing complete words or morphemes) subsist in the system. These
logographs which are contained in the box in Appendix I, may well be of some special interest in
view of the world view and philosophy promoted through the medium of the script; but we are
yet to fully understand their significance.
   Respectively preceding and following the syllabic phase in the evolution of writing systems
are the pictographic and ideographic phases, on the one hand, and the phonetic or alphabetic
phase, on the other hand, the latter being the phase to which alphabets of the kind found in the
Arabic and the Roman scripts belong. All these phases, which are not necessarily in strict
chronological-evolutionary sequence, have manifested themselves in various parts of West
Africa where more than thirty different types of indigenous writing systems are known to exist,
and the Nwagu Aneke system is clearly part of this wider West African phenomenon.
   Pictographic writing seems to have evolved from the rock art and symbolic markings on
surfaces and bodies by early man. It is a form of writing in which man made use of simple
pictures to represent his experiences. Thus, for example, a stylized picture of the sun [ O ] would
be understood as representing the sun while such a picture of a person [ ^ ] would be understood
as representing a man or a woman. A string of such pictures could be used to tell a story as in
many early scripts. There are traces of picture-writing in Nsibidi—the writing system employed
     Chukwuma Azuonye / The Nwagu Aneke Igbo Script: Its Origins, Features and Potentials          5


by the Igbo, Ibibio, Efik and Ekoi peoples of the Cross River Area of south-eastern Nigeria in
pre-colonial times for various documentary, cultic, erotic and other expressive purposes (see
Maxwell, 1905; MacGreggor, 1909; Dayrell, 1910 and 1911; Talbot, 1912; Jeffreys, 1934; and
Kalu, 1982). Nsibidi is however not exclusively pictographic. It contains elements of the
ideographic system of writing, showing that it probably belongs to the transitional stage between
pictographic and ideographic writing. Thus, in Nsibidi, while the stylized characters [ ) ] and [ (
] are used pictographically in isolation to represent man and woman respectively, they are also
used ideographically, in various combinations, to represent various ideas connected with man-
woman relationships. For example, the figure of a man and a woman backing one another with a
line (pillow?) between them [ )I( ] represents a quarrel between husband and wife while marital
love is represented by the figure of a man and a woman locked into one another [ () ]. Such ideas
can be intensified by the addition of one or more strokes. For example, violent marital discord is
indicated by strokes suggestive of sparks of fire from the discord, thus:


In a few characters, such as the one for a prostitute [       ], we can see a clear link between
pictographic and ideographic representation. The wide open legs of the whore is unmistakable in
this strikingly pictographic ideograph. The provenance of such ideographs may be traced back to
age-old decorative and symbolic markings on human bodies such as the Igbo uli (see Willis,
1987) and mnemonic markings on other objects and surfaces such as the yam-marks of the
Western Igbo (see Thomas, 1913, III:183). Other possible sources are the more elaborate forms
of graphic symbolism associated with magical and religious rituals in most West African
societies which have been discussed in some detail in Dalby (1968).
   The Nwagu Aneke script has been erroneously described by the Nigerian press as Nsibidi, and
Nwagu Aneke himself tended to accept this erroneous description in one of his books entitled
The Spirits Implore Me to Record All They Have Taught Me (D13); but, as has been noted above,
the script belongs to a different system and phase in the evolution of writing. It is syllabic, with
the basic CV syllables of Nwagu Aneke's Umuleri dialect of Igbo represented by the characters
presented in Appendix I. But this syllabary, like the syllabary of ancient Hebrew and many other
ancient scripts, does not have characters for vowels per se. Consequently, it does not have any
place for V syllables. This means that a number of words in the language which contain syllabic
vowels cannot be fully represented in the script. For example, the common name, Obioma [O-bi-
o-ma] which contains two V syllable [O] and [o] can only be realized in the script as bi-ma, thus:

      O    bi    ọ   ma

A new initiate into the script can therefore only read words of this kind by recall or in context
(see Azuonye, forthcoming). Because of this deficiency, a number of characters are used
somewhat logographically to represent many different words in different contexts. Thus, the
character [           ], bi, will not only represent the word O-bi, as in the above example, but also
u-bi (farm), i-bi (scrotal elephantiasis) and e-bi (porcupine), depending on the context. Similarly,
     Chukwuma Azuonye / The Nwagu Aneke Igbo Script: Its Origins, Features and Potentials          6



the character [     ], ma, will represent, in addition to o-ma (beautiful; good), such other words
as a-ma (village-square), u-ma (character), and the like. The Maseorites solved this kind of
problem in the ancient Hebrew script in which YAHWEH, for example, was originally written as
YHWH without vowels, by creating a system of vowel characters for the script. The Nwagu
Aneke script is yet to be subjected to such a complementation.
   However, neither Nwagu Aneke nor any of the other exponents of indigenous writing in West
Africa regards such complementation a necessary refinement. Before his tragic death in an
automobile accident on June 2, 1991, Nwagu Aneke had been engaged for about three years as a
Writer-in-Residence in the Division of General Studies at the University of Nigeria, but he spent
his time writing the numerous messages from the spirits rather than pay attention to such a purely
mechanical matter although his attention was drawn to it from time to time. Oblivious of any
deficiencies in the systems believed to have been received directly from God through the
instrumentality of the ancestral spirits, Nwagu Aneke and his counterparts elsewhere in West
Africa have been content to promote their scripts as media for alternative literacy counteracting
the white man's claims to intellectual and cultural superiority by reason of the possession of the
power of the written word capable of transmitting messages across time and space and providing
the graphic infrastructure for technological development. Thus, as in the case of the Vai script of
Liberia (see Wilson and Wynkoop, 1834; Koelle, 1849; and Hair, 1963), Nwagu Aneke claims in
his books that the gift of writing from the spirits is proof not only that the black man has the
same technological ability as the white man but that he will take over from where the white man,
will sooner than later be forced to give way (F24: I Went Round the World).

The Potentials of the Script as a Medium of Alternative Literacy
   As I have pointed out, the wider implications of the propagation of indigenous writing as a
medium for alternative literacy in West Africa constitute one of the key concerns of the Nwagu
Aneke Research Project (1990: 7-8). Many of these concerns are purely psychological. But our
main concern is with the prospects of establishing more practical uses of script in contemporary
social communication.
   Basically psychological is the exciting idea of "a script of our own" which must be used, even
against the odds as an expression of cultural independence. In the 19th century, this kind of
cultural nationalist attitude seems to have strongly influenced the great popularity enjoyed by the
Vai script among the rural population of the Liberian hinterland. As "a script of our own", the
Vai script served effectively as a medium of indigenous nationalist reaction against the growing
dominance of Americo-Liberian elements in the national life of what was then a new African
republic. Everywhere in the countryside, outside Freetown, the true indigenes (tailors, foremen,
laborers, housewives, market-women, etc) spurned English and the Roman script and insisted on
acquiring literacy in their own script, the Vai script, which they called to use in all transactions
of everyday life - fabric measurement, recording lists of workers and their wages, market lists,
and for personal correspondence and the keeping of family and private personal records (See
Koelle (1849). This trend has continued to a large degree till today with very startling results for
alternative adult literacy in rural Liberia. Thus, Carraher (1987: 103) observes, quoting statistical
     Chukwuma Azuonye / The Nwagu Aneke Igbo Script: Its Origins, Features and Potentials              7


evidence from Scribner and Cole (1978), that, as recently as the middle of the 1980"s and
"Despite competition with English and Arabic, 20-25% of adult males were literate in Vai,
although Vai script was taught outside of formal schooling." Carraher's explanation for this
phenomenon is that "Since Vai literacy is acquired under informal conditions of instruction, it is
most likely that what favors the acquisition of Vai literacy is the meaning it has for those who
learn it." Apart from the use of the script to protect business and personal records from the
outsider, including the government (which is still regarded in most African countries as inimical
to the interests of the individual), "the meaning" which Vai literacy holds for rural Liberians is
purely cultural nationalistic. Thus, as Ofri-Scheps (1990: 36) observes,

   the indigenous population is disinclined to acquire literacy in an African language by means of a
   non-endogenously developed writing, e.g. using the Roman or Arabic alphabets (Emphasis
   added).

Such a cultural nationalist impulse may well lie behind the much-vaunted secrecy of the use of
the older pictographic-ideographic system, Nsibidi, in south-eastern Nigeria where, as the
literature repeatedly tells us, there was always a great deal of reluctance on the part of its
purveyors to admit the white man into the secrets of its codes (see MacGreggor, 1909; Talbot,
1912; and Dayrell, I910 and 1911).
    But beyond these cultural nationalist arguments, lie a number of practical and pedagogical
questions regarding the value of the indigenous scripts as a media for alternative literacy in
African Languages, and these constitute the central concern in this paper.
    As a syllabary, the Nwagu Aneke script, as we have noted, occupies a stage in the evolution
of writing traditionally located by linguists "between phoneticized pictographic and alphabetic
systems". Part of the rationale for setting up the Nwagu Aneke Research Project is the
assumption that, "the more we understand the provenance, nature and other aspects of the script,
the more we can understand certain aspects of the evolution of writing systems on which there is
doubt, debate or paucity of evidence." Working, as have done until his death in 1991, with a
living innovator of this type of script, we have been able to amass valuable textual and
autobiographical data that must be of value to future students of the phenomenon of writing. In
addition, as we have argued in our research project proposal, "the Nwagu Aneke script promises
to contribute excellent data for the study of the rudiments of visual communication and for the
investigation of certain aspects of the interface between literacy and orality". Such a study could
be highly useful in planning adult literacy programs, especially in view of Nwagu Aneke's
sudden and traumatic transformation from the oral-aural to the visual-graphic mode of
communication.
    If there are any doubts about the serious attention which our team is giving to the Nwagu
Aneke phenomenon, it seems necessary to face the question of Nwagu Aneke's choice of the
syllabic medium rather than the well-established alphabetic medium actively in use in schools,
churches, offices, business establishments and elsewhere all around him. Why would the
powerful voices or impulses from the past direct him, not toward the imitation of this actively
present graphic medium but to something different and apparently distant? Are we faced here
     Chukwuma Azuonye / The Nwagu Aneke Igbo Script: Its Origins, Features and Potentials                 8


with a case of sheer atavism? Or are we beholden to a form of nativism which seems to say: "If
they have their own script, we must have ours". Or is there something fundamentally different in
the structure of African and related languages which calls for a form of graphic representation
which the Roman script is inadequate to offer?
   In our proposal, we have hypothesized this vital difference and the relativism which naturally
goes with it. It seems to us that the Nwagu Aneke and similar scripts do indeed represent
effective counters to "the assumption that alphabetic scripts are based on the most sophisticated
and accurate analysis of language structure as compared with `earlier' writing systems". In this
regard, the agenda we have set for ourselves in the study of the script includes two broad fields
of investigations: "Firstly, an investigation of the status of the script as a syllabary examining
such issues as: the relations or interconnections of the script with other extant syllabaries; the
grammatical features of the script with regard to its fidelity to the grammatical rules of Igbo and
the internal consistency of the script with regard to the correspondence between its graphic
symbols and the grammatical forms they are intended to represent. Secondly, the implications of
the adoption of the script for language planning and other forms of social engineering would be
considered". It is in the later field that we locate the alternative literacy option.
   Our starting point in pursuing the alternative literacy option is the hypothesis which is
currently beginning to be widely accepted in the scholarship of literacy that unlettered adults find
it easier to acquire literacy through a syllabary than through an alphabet. Stubbs (1980: 80)
invokes this hypothesis in his study of the conflict between Eskimo literacy in the Eskimo
syllabary introduced in 1878 and in the Roman script introduced much later in 1953 and notes
that the "syllabary is...easier to learn" on the linguistic grounds that, for literacy purposes, "a
syllabary is preferable for those languages with a suitable phonological structure." But this fact
notwithstanding, literacy in the Eskimo syllabary is rapidly declining. Stubbs (1980: 82-82)
explains that, pandering to international politics of literacy which uses economic and
questionable cultural arguments to exclude alternative to total world domination by entrenched
Western systems, that,

   although a syllabary is arguably efficient on linguistic and pedagogical grounds, and is widely
   used and accepted by the Eskimo, it is clearly at odds with the broader socio-economic needs of
   the Eskimo's place in Canadian society... the use of a Roman alphabet will facilitate their learning
   to read and write English (or French) and ultimately make it easier for them to find jobs in Canada
   and the USA. Thus the short-term educational needs of the individual are in conflict with the long-
   term economic and cultural needs of the individual and the social group. This type of conflict is
   always most clear-cut when it is between the language system of a small group and an
   international language such as English.

The political and neo-colonialist tone of this apologia is unmistakable, especially when put side
by side with another argument justifying the continued use of a syllabary in Japan, an argument
which can also be made for Eskimo and many African languages. According to Stubbs (1980: 4):
   In a syllabary, there is ideally one symbol for each is syllable. Japanese uses two syllabaries,
alongside other writing systems, with less than fifty symbols. The phonological structures of
     Chukwuma Azuonye / The Nwagu Aneke Igbo Script: Its Origins, Features and Potentials        9


Japanese is ideal for such a system since the syllabic structure is very simple. Syllables in
Japanese have the structure (C)V(N), that is, a vowel preceded optionally by a consonant and
followed by a nasal /m/, /n/, or /n/, depending on the following sound. No other possibilities
exist, and therefore Japanese has a very small number of possible syllabic type. A syllabary
would on the other hand be very uneconomical in English, which allows so many other
possibilities of syllable type that a syllabary would require hundreds of signs. In modern English,
there are no syllabic signs in normal use.
    If there are economic and neo-colonialist arguments for the continued use of the Roman script
for the teaching of African languages, as in the case of Eskimo, the linguistic-structural
arguments, illustrated by the example of Japanese, seems to suggest the opposite. The syllabic
structure of many African languages are even simpler than that of Japanese, and there is no
reason why the existing African syllabaries, such as the Nwagu Aneke syllabary, cannot be
rationalized for literacy purposes into systems with fewer characters or symbols than they
contain in their present crude forms. It is not expected that the syllabaries would displace the
official Roman and Arabic scripts inherited from the colonial powers. It is difficult to see how
African governments, which hang tenaciously to their colonial boundaries, can give up such
precious legacies of colonialism. It is however hoped that, recognizing and capitalizing on their
pedagogical efficiency, the indigenous scripts can promoted as media for alternative functional
literacy at the grassroots. The Nwagu Aneke Research Project (1990: 7-8) is interested in
exploring such possibilities. Confirming the existing pedagogical hypothesis just review, a pilot
sampling of unlettered Igbo villagers in the Nsukka area by the late Professor Donatus Nwoga,
originator and first Director of the project, suggests that when presented with visual information
in the Roman and the Nwagu Aneke scripts, the stark illiterate found it much easier to associate
sound with graphic forms in the syllabic system than in the alphabetic system. Indeed, the
"syllable hypothesis" in child language learning (Olson, Torrance and Hildyard, 1985: 224-226),
whereby the child unscrambles names and counts the syllables as a basis for learning, suggests
that the syllabary is probably by far the most natural medium of literacy, and this is probably so
because, as Plato says through Socrates in Theaetetus (202-202; quoted in Goody and Watt,
1975: 54), "the elements or letters are only objects of perception, and cannot be defined or
known; but the syllables or combinations of them are known and... apprehended". Nevertheless,
it is our contention in the Nwagu Aneke Research Team that these possibilities still need to be
subjected to further rigorous and systematic experimental verification in the field. If such
systematic field verification confirm our sample observations not only for Igbo but for other
African languages, the development of the script for the purposes of adult literacy programs
ought to be pursued with utmost vigor, and this will involve finding solutions to some of the
limitations of the script for such purposes, notably the absence of vowels, diacritical marks,
punctuation marks and boundaries of words, sentences and larger syntagmatic units and the
multiple value of certain characters. But we have the experience of the development of similar
effects in many other scripts to draw from. And the example of Ofri-Scheps with the Vai script
(1990: 36) suggests the viability of involving systems engineers in creating or adapting suitable
software for the script to facilitate the production of reading material in it.
    Chukwuma Azuonye / The Nwagu Aneke Igbo Script: Its Origins, Features and Potentials           10


    It may be argued that the development of alternative literacy in what many would regard as a
quaint indigenous script cannot be of any real value other than as an expression of nativistic
romanticism or the fetishization of writing. Furthermore, it may be argued that there is no need to
complicate further the literacy problem in Africa by the introduction of a second-tier when
efforts should be devoted to making the various scripts already in use and enjoying official
patronage to reach the grassroots. But, such an argument can also easily be extended to the
official recognition accorded alternative or traditional medicine by national governments and
international organizations such as the World Health Organization. The development of
alternative literacy in a script that is confirmed through empirical research to be more easily
accessible to the generality of the illiterate masses need not be seen as either obstructive or
destructive since such a second-tier of literacy exists in some other countries and does indeed
exist in parts of Africa like in Northern Nigeria, where the Ajami script provides alternative
literacy in Hausa, Fulfulde, Kanuri and some minority languages of that highly Islamicized
region. The kind of alternative literacy which can be developed in the Nwagu Aneke system can
be effectively exploited in devising communicative strategies for reaching the rural masses with
vital health care messages, agricultural extension information, environmental protection briefs
and other kinds of information about social policy designed for them but which have hardly been
successfully transmitted to them through the Roman script over the decades. Clearly an
alternative medium seems called for.
    But, apart from the purely pedagogic and mass communicative aspects of alternative literacy
is the possibility of developing the script as a form of shorthand for African languages, especially
in view of the fact that Pitman's shorthand which is currently in vogue in West Africa was
developed on the phonological system of English and has no provision for a number of sound
patterns common to many African languages, especially implosives like \kp\, \kw\, \gb\, \gw\.
\ny\, \nw\, etc. We are informed by Mr Loveday Umezurike, Secretary to the Director of the
Division of General Studies at the University of Nigeria, Nsukka, and a stenographer attached to
the Nwagu Aneke Research Project, that, from his knowledge of the Pitman's system, while it is
founded on the same syllabic principles as the Nwagu Aneke script, the Nwagu Aneke system
has the advantage of dual advantage of being shorter and covering sounds and sound-patterns in
Igbo which he always wrote in long hand while taking notes in short hand. He however noted
that the script is yet to develop a cursive style to enhance the speed of taking notes in it. If these
claims are verified, the development of a cursive style in the script will take the course of such
development in other scripts, including the far more cumbersome far eastern scripts.
    The cultural nationalist implications of these and other practical possibilities seem plain
enough. Like the other indigenous scripts of West Africa, the Nwagu Aneke script is not just the
creation of its inspired originator or purveyor in reaction against the dominance of alien
mentifacts imposed by colonialism; it is, more significantly, probably a rediscovery and
reactivation of a mode of expression which has been developed without external stimulus in a
traditional African culture and which seems to possess the potential of serving the present as
effectively as the forms borrowed from alien sources. But even where their continued use in the
present cultural situation cannot be assured, the knowledge of their existence seems to be a
    Chukwuma Azuonye / The Nwagu Aneke Igbo Script: Its Origins, Features and Potentials           11


crucial part of the cultural nationalist assertion of a past with parallel intellectual attainments as
those of the colonizer.

Summary and Conclusions
    This paper has examined the origins and aspects of the design and message of the Nwagu
Aneke Igbo Syllabary, one of the major forms of indigenous writing that have (re)-emerged in
West Africa since colonial times. Both the script and the message which it communicates have
been shown to be deeply committed and powerful expressions of cultural nationalism which
strike at the very roots of colonial mentality: spiritual and intellectual servitude. The mission of
the script and its message is clear: to dismantle all alien and alienating structures superimposed
on vital African cultural institutions and values by the colonial experience. The texts call for a
radical return to these African cultural institutions and values, holding them up as superior to,
and more suited to the African environment than values from the intellectual traditions inherited
from the colonial powers. Apocalyptic, poetic, revolutionary and generally philosophical, the
protests cover all aspects of post-colonial life which have been re-directed from the ancestral
path by the colonial experience.
    The ancestral message of the Nwagu Aneke and other indigenous scripts is probably belated.
The ideas they question seem so deeply entrenched that only a grassroots, pan-African revolution
(probably an impossible proposition in the contemporary African situation) can bring about the
kind of change they envision. Nevertheless, the message is clearly important as part of the
ongoing crusade for setting off evolutionary processes toward the decolonization of the African
mind. And to this enterprise, Nwagu Aneke brings a home-bred intellect, imagination and
honesty which western-educated crusaders in the same field, like Chinweizu, et al (1983) and
Ngugi wa Thiong'o (1986), will be hard put to match.
    The use of an indigenous script features frequently as part of the mission of prophets of new
national religions or ideologies. Nwagu Aneke uses the script to draw attention to his mission,
which he sees as the enormous task of revealing the rich spiritual, moral and intellectual
resources of a pre-colonial African civilization which he considers as one of the greatest in the
world. The triad of God, spirits and the elemental deities is central to that civilization and is
promoted as superior to all imported faiths. The intellectual resources of that civilization have
created a political system based on natural rulership which is far more conducive for peace and
progress than the divisive and corrupt system inherited from the colonial powers. Nwagu Aneke
sees his writings as the bridge between the chaotic present and that lost civilization.
    Studies of literature in the indigenous scripts of West Africa are few and far between. Most of
the existing studies focus on the Book of Rora in the Vai Script (see Hair, 1963: 48-49; Holsoe,
1976, and Ofri-Scheps, 1990). Despite references to the large quantity of writings in by King
Njoya of the Foubam kingdom in Cameroon in the Bamum script (Crawford, 1935: 438; Dugast
and Jeffreys, 1950; and Schmitt, 1963), there are no extant studies of these writings. The reason
for the paucity of such studies is probably the inaccessibility or scarcity of literary materials in
the great majority of the indigenous scripts. The Nwagu Aneke Igbo script is refreshingly
different. For over thirty years, from the late 1950's to his death in June 1991, Nwagu Aneke
wrote persistently in the script and left behind over 100 exercise book filled with his vibrant anti-
    Chukwuma Azuonye / The Nwagu Aneke Igbo Script: Its Origins, Features and Potentials           12


colonial messages. With the forthcoming publication of Nwoga's edition of his scriptures and
with the publication of editions of other "books" produced before and during his tenure as
Writer-in-Residence at the University of Nigeria, literature in the indigenous script of West
Africa will no doubt be given more serious attention than they now command, not as cultural
curios or merely as data for reconstructing aspects of the story of the evolution of writing
systems, but as works of art and as expressions of the personal philosophies of their authors and
of the world views and ideologies of the traditional societies and the larger African world to
which they belong. The Nwagu Aneke corpus will no doubt occupy a central place in such a re-
ordering of values. But, on a more practical note, as I have been arguing in this paper, it is hoped
that it will provide a practical medium for alternative literacy in African languages, in "a script of
our own" which will be assure its own continuity and the continuity of its message. The members
of the Nwagu Aneke Research Project Team are ready at hand to participate in any wider project
through which these objectives can be realized. Efforts to persuade the government and
institutions in Nigeria to acquire the 100 extant manuscripts in the script have been frustrated
owing to the apparent failure of the authorities to perceive their long-term value for black culture
and history. The amount of money required for this acquisition is rather small at the moment, but
as the years go by, we stand the risk of losing the manuscripts altogether or having to acquire
them (but even then, possibly only fragments of them) at a much more exorbitant price. In the
circumstances, the Nwagu Aneke Research Team stands ready to explore new avenues of
support in its efforts to establish the texts in the script as an important corpus for Africana
studies.

                                          REFERENCES

Achebe, Chinua. 1964. Arrow of God. London: Heinemann (African Writers Series).
African Repository. 1834. "The Origins of the Vai Syllabary", African Repository, V, August:
    180.
Azuonye, Chukwuma. Forthcoming. "The Development of Written Igbo Literature".
    Groundwork of Igbo History, ed. A.E. Afigbo. Lagos and New York: Nok Publishers.
    Chapter 26.
Bennett, J.A.H. and J.W. Berry. 1987. "The Future of Cree Literacy in Northern Canada". In:
    Daniel Wagner (ed.), The Future of Literacy in a Changing World, Pergamon Press.
Bloomfield, Leonard. 1935. Language. London: George Allen and Unwin Ltd. Reprinted 1973.
Carraher, Terezinha Nunes. 1987. "Illiteracy in a Literate Society: Understanding Reading
    Failure in Brazil". In: Daniel Wagner (ed.), The Future of Literacy in a Changing World,
    Pergamon Press.
Chinweizu, Onwuchekwa Jemie and Ihechukwu Madubuike. 1983. Toward the Decolonization
    of African Literature. Washington, D.C.: Howard University Press.
Dalby, David. 1967. "A Survey of the Indigenous Scripts of Liberia and Sierra Leone: Vai,
   Mende, Loma, Kpelle and Bassa". African Language Studies, VIII: 1-51.
_____. 1968. "The Indigenous Scripts of West Africa an Surinam: Their Inspiration and Design".
   African Language Studies, IX: 156-197.
    Chukwuma Azuonye / The Nwagu Aneke Igbo Script: Its Origins, Features and Potentials     13


_____. 1969. "Further Indigenous Scripts of West Africa: Manding, Wolof and Fula Alphabet,
   and Yoruba 'Holy' Writing". African Language Studies, X, 1969: 161-181.
Dayrell, Elphinstone. 1910. "Some Nsibidi Signs". Man, X (8).
_____. 1911. "Further Notes on Nsibidi Signs with their Meanings from the Ikom District".
   Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute, 41: 521-540.
Dugast, I and M.D.W.Jeffreys. 1950. L'Ecriture des Bamum. I.F.A.N. (Cameroon).
Goody, Jack and Ian Watts. 1975. "The Consequences of Literacy". In: Jack Goody (ed.),
   Literacy in Traditional Societies, Cambridge University Press.
Hair, P.E.H. 1963. "Notes on the Discovery of the Vai Script with Bibliography". Sierra Leone
   Language Review, 2: 36-49.
Holsoe, Svend E. 1976. "An Early Vai Manuscript from Liberia". African Languages/Langues
   Africaines, 2: 33-57.
Jeffreys, M.D.W. 1934. "Corrections on Man, 1910, item 67: "Nsibidi Writing'. Man, item 194.
Kalu, O.U. 1982. "Writing in Pre-Colonial Africa: A Case-Study of Nsibidi". Readings in
    African Humanities: African Cultural Development, ed. Ogbu U. Kalu. Enugu: Fourth
    Dimension Publishers. Chapter 6.
Koelle, S.W. 1849. Narrative of an Expedition into the Vy Country of West Africa, and the
    Discovery of a System of Syllabic Writing, recently invented by the Natives of the Vy Tribe.
    London.
MacGreggor, J.K. 1909. "Some Nsibidi Signs". Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute,
    39: 210.
Mazrui, Ali A. c. 1986. The Africans: A Triple Heritage. Boston: Little, Brown and Company.
Ngugi wa Thiong'o. 1986. Decolonizing the Mind: The Politics of Language in African
    Literature. London: James Currey; Portsmouth, N.H.: Little, Brown and Company.
Nwagu Aneke Research Project. 1990. Nwagu Aneke Research Project Proposal. Nsukka:
    University of Nigeria.
_____. 1991. The Passing of a Prophet: Funeral Rites of Ogbuefi Nwagu Aneke, c 1921-1991.
    Nsukka: University of Nigeria.
Nwoga, Donatus Ibe. 1984. The Supreme God as Stranger in Igbo Religious Thought.
    Ekwereazu, Ahiazu, Mbaise: Hawk Press.
_____. 1987. "The Origins, Form and Significance of the Nwagu Aneke Igbo Script, Part I:
      Origins". Nsukka Journal of Linguistics and African Languages, 2: 1-21 (in press).
_____. Forthcoming. Nwagu Aneke: The Scriptures of an African Visionary. Ibadan: Heinemann
      Educational Publishers.
Ofri-Scheps, Dorith Minna. 1990. "Using the Vai Language to Promote Literacy in Liberia".
      Spirit of Enterprise: The 1990 Rolex Awards, ed. David W. Reed. Bern: Buri Druck, AG.
Olson, David R., Nancy Torrance and Angela Hildyard. 1985. Literacy, Language and Learning:
    The Nature and Consequences of Reading and Writing. Cambridge University Press.
Schmitt, A. 1963. Die Bamum-Schrift. 3 Vols. Wiesbaden.
Stubbs, Michael. 1980. Language and Literacy: The Sociolinguistics Reading and Writing.
   Routledge and Kegan Paul.
Talbot, P.A. 1912. In the Shadow of a Bush. London.
    Chukwuma Azuonye / The Nwagu Aneke Igbo Script: Its Origins, Features and Potentials   14


Thomas, Northcote. 1914. Anthropological Report on the Ibo-Speaking People of Nigeria, Part
  V: Law and Custom. Reprinted Negro Universities Press, New York, 1972.
Willis, Elizabeth. 1987. "A Lexicon of Igbo Uli Motifs". Nsukka Journal of the Humanities, I
  (June): 91-122.
Wilson, J.L. and S.R. Wynkoop. 1834. Reports on the Discovery of the Vai Script in Missionary
  Herald, 215, 337. Reproduced in O.Bates, ed., Harvard African Studies, 1, 1917: 290-292,
Chukwuma Azuonye / The Nwagu Aneke Igbo Script: Its Origins, Features and Potentials   15
Chukwuma Azuonye / The Nwagu Aneke Igbo Script: Its Origins, Features and Potentials   16



             Appendix 1: The Syllabary of the Nwagu Aneke Script
             (From The Nwagu Aneke Research Project Proposal, p. 5)
           Appendix II: Alphabetical List of Nwagu Aneke's Characters




                        (Prepared by Donatus Nwoga, 1991)
Chukwuma Azuonye / The Nwagu Aneke Igbo Script: Its Origins, Features and Potentials
                                                                                 17
